

Intensive keyboard use has been associated with an increased risk of developing musculoskeletal symptoms and disorders of the hand, wrist, and arm (Gerr et al., 2002, 2006; Jensen, 2003). Symptoms include pain, tingling, numbness, stiffness and disorders such as carpal tunnel syndrome and tendinitis. The affected tissues include muscle, tendon and tendinous insertions. A review of the physiological evidence suggests that a plausible basis for the pathogenesis of muscle disorders of the upper extremity in low-intensity tasks is sustained motor unit recruitment and homeostatic disturbances coincided with sustained low-intensity muscle activity (Visser and van Dieen, 2006).

Sustained low-intensity muscle activity has been associated with adducted and extended wrist postures during keyboard intensive tasks (Dennerlein and Johnson, 2006). These non-neutral wrist postures have been associated with arm/hand symptoms among computer users (Wahlstrom, 2005). Ergonomic guidelines recommend avoiding non-neutral postures during computer work (Hedge and Powers, 1995; Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 1997; Marklin and Simoneau, 2004). Despite abundant epidemiologic evidence of association between awkward wrist postures and musculoskeletal symptoms/disorders, little is known about how internal tissue loading is affected by joint posture during computer use.

Biomechanically these non-neutral postures can increase internal loading on the muscles and joints. Rempel et al. (2008) reported that changes in wrist posture altered carpal tunnel pressure, which may contribute to the development or aggravation of carpal tunnel syndrome (Rempel et al., 1999, 2008). Specifically, wrist deviations in extension or radial deviation while typing are associated with an increase in pressure. In addition, posture also affects muscle force and activation patterns (Dennerlein et al., 1998b; Visser et al., 2000; Kuo et al., 2006).

Computational biomechanical models have been used to estimate muscle/tendon force based on external measures (Chao et al., 1976; Herzog and Leonard, 1991; Dennerlein et al., 1998a; Sancho-Bru et al., 2001) because direct in vivo measurement of internal loading is invasive and technically difficult. Previous models often investigated finger and wrist joints separately. It is important to include both the finer and the wrist joints to study keying activities because several muscle-tendon units articulate both finger and wrist joints. In addition, passive muscle forces contribute to the dynamic motion of the fingers, and therefore cannot be neglected in biomechanical models. However, only a limited number of existing models incorporated muscle passive properties (Sancho-Bru et al., 2001; Keir and Wells, 2002). These models use passive finger muscle properties obtained from cadaveric work (Lee and Rim, 1990; Ranney et al., 1987) which were found to overestimate the passive joint torques measured in experiment (Qin et al., 2010). New data for the passive finger muscle force assessment parameters have been proposed, which can improve the estimation of muscle force using biomechanical models of the hand (Qin et al., 2010).

The objective of this study is to quantify the effect of wrist posture on resultant hand and forearm muscle stress (including both active and passive component) during tapping on a computer keyboard, using a computational biomechanical model. It is our hypothesis that non-neutral wrist postures increase muscle stress mainly due to increase of passive muscle resistance.

