

There were two phases of work in this study. The first was to develop new designs of gloves and the second was to run an experiment to evaluate the designs.

The prototype gloves were constructed by modifying a glove that is commercially available and widely used for industrial assembly work, the modification being to the thickness of material so that it could be suited to the hand/tool interaction in particular areas of the hand. The two prototype gloves constructed represented two different approaches. One was based on published evidence of the differences in the areas of discomfort between the bare hand and the gloved hand conditions, and the other was based on the need for finger and hand flexibility while working with tools such as screwdriver and pliers. In other words, the thickness of material was varied over the surface of the hand to reduce the discomfort of wearing gloves or to enhance performance capabilities.

The gloves were made of cotton, the thickness of the basic material (of the commercially available glove) being 0.8mm. The results of the two previous studies (Dianat et al., 2010, 2012a) had already shown that cotton gloves can be a better option for light assembly tasks than nylon or nitrile gloves (1mm and 1.4mm in thickness, respectively), which caused more adverse effects on some hand performance capabilities. Two comparison gloves were included in the evaluation trials: the commercial cotton glove and a double thickness (1.6mm) cotton glove (one glove worn over another, the two being anchored by strategic stitching). The structures of the two prototype designs are shown in Table 1
                            and described below. Three sizes of each glove (small, medium and large pairs) were prepared for the evaluation trials.

To modify the cotton glove, the selected areas which would have just the thin layer of material were first mapped on to the glove. Then, for each size of glove, a template of the desired areas was prepared from cardboard. The prepared templates were used later as master patterns to cut holes in the “over” gloves to the correct shape.

A pilot test was performed to test whether it would be better to have the glove with the “holes” as the inner glove or as the outer glove. It was thought that, if the edges of the holes caught on the tool or component being manipulated, the glove might deteriorate gradually over the set of evaluation trials or might interfere with the task being performed. Therefore, it was decided that the glove with the “holes” should be the inner glove. This glove with the selected areas removed was placed into another cotton glove of the same size so that it produced a double glove with an unbroken surface for the outer layer.

Another difficulty which had to be overcome when constructing the gloves was to make sure that the inner glove could not slip in relation to the outer glove while it was being used. So the two gloves were sewn together, not only at the edges of the holes but also around the sides of the fingers and around the wrist.

The first approach to re-designing the cotton gloves was to consider the different patterns of discomfort between the bare hand condition and the gloved hand while working with the hand tools. This data was already available from two previous studies by the present authors (Dianat et al., 2010, 2012a). When gloves are worn, tactility (especially in fingertips) and dexterity will be reduced due to the layer of glove material between the hand and the tool's handle and this is likely to make it more difficult to manipulate both the components and the hand tool. Some gloves used in industry have the fingertips of the gloves removed for just this purpose. Therefore, to have better control over the task and tool, the tool handle should be held firmly between the palm and thenar area, with extra support from thumb and index finger which may lead to more discomfort in these areas of the hand. Several glove characteristics such as thickness, material and flexibility of the material may be responsible for these effects, but it was too complex to consider all the factors simultaneously, so the present experiment was focused on the glove thickness.

The previous studies showed that for the barehanded screwdriver task, the most discomfort was reported in the fingertips of the index and middle fingers. When wearing gloves for this task, the highest levels of discomfort were reported in the palm area, thenar area, and lower part of both the thumb and the index finger (a diagram identifying each of the areas of the hand can be seen in the Appendix). When working barehanded with pliers, the most discomfort was reported in the palm area. When wearing gloves for the pliers task, the highest levels of discomfort were reported in the lower part of both the thumb and the index finger.

The above findings indicate that there is more discomfort when wearing gloves than while barehanded. It was hypothesized that removing material to a single layer may help to reduce (or at least not increase) the gloved discomfort and that the thinner single layer may help to reduce the barehanded fingertip discomfort. Therefore, the re-designed glove incorporated these findings into a glove that had thinner layers in some areas (especially in the region of the fingertips of thumb, index and middle finger), which should facilitate better sensory feedback and dexterity and so minimise slipping or the need for excessive gripping. For practical reasons, the re-designed gloves were constructed of double cotton gloves so that the selected areas with a thinner layer had a single-layered cotton glove. Fig. 2
                            shows the areas that had a thinner layer in the first re-designed glove and the glove itself is shown within Table 1.

The second approach to re-design the glove was to consider glove effects that cause difficulty in flexing the finger joints when working with hand tools. A pilot test was performed which examined this effect and it was found that the primary areas in which resistance was felt during flexion movements of the fingers when manipulating hand tools were at the dorsal aspect of the hand in the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints (shown as red dashed lines in Fig. 3(a)). It was hypothesized that overcoming the resistance against finger movements at these points may restrict grip posture or necessitate increased force exertion, which in turn could be another possible reason for greater feelings of discomfort when wearing gloves. Therefore, the second re-designed glove had a completely different pattern of cut-outs from Design 1 – the cut-outs of Design 1 are on the palmar side of the glove while the cut-outs of Design 2 are on the dorsal side of the glove. The areas with the thinner layer to reduce the resistance against finger and joint flexion movements are shown in Fig. 3(b) and the glove itself is shown within Table 1.

For the evaluation trials, participants performed a simulated assembly task using the same experimental equipment and layout as in the previous studies by Dianat et al. (2010, 2012a). The task involved the use of both a screwdriver and pliers, which are two different hand tools commonly used in assembly operations and together demonstrate a range of task demands. The screwdriving task consisted of using a screwdriver to assemble two components together using screws (Fig. 4(a)). The screwdriver had a conventional flat head blade with a longitudinal round cross-sectional handle (having a grooved surface). The handle of the screwdriver was 10cm in length and 3cm in diameter and the stem was 100mm×6mm. The screws were 2.5cm in length with a screw head diameter of 10mm. The screwdriver task required that each participant fit and support the two components with his left hand, and then turn a screw into each of the component's holes, fastening it with the screwdriver in the right hand. The pliers task was a typical wire tying task using conventional straight type pliers (as frequently used in industry), which had a grip span of 5cm and weight of 205g (Fig. 4(b)). The wires were 9cm in length with a diameter of 1.6mm. The pliers task required that each participant hold the wire with his left hand and fold both ends of the wire into a U shape using the pliers with the right hand, and then tie the two ends of the U shaped wire together (for one turn).

The two independent variables examined in the study were (1) hand condition with five levels (single-layered cotton glove, double cotton glove, re-designed glove 1 and re-designed glove 2 as well as barehanded), and (2) point of time within the 2-h duration of the task (with measurements taken at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120min). Based on the results of the two earlier studies (Dianat et al., 2010, 2012a) the duration of a 2-h work period appeared to be adequate to evaluate the effects of wearing gloves. Each experimental trial consisted of four 30-min sections of the task (equivalent to a 2-h work period except that short breaks took place at 30min intervals to permit measurement of the performance measures and recording of subjective assessments). Therefore, a typical trial lasted for a little over 2h. The participants were asked to work in turn with screwdrivers and pliers, each for 15min during each 30-min section of the 2-h work period. Four component assemblies or 30 wire ties were completed during each 15min. Each participant performed five trials (2-h work periods) over five successive weeks, each session testing a different hand condition (with the order of presentation of the hand conditions randomized across the participants). The order in which the two tools (screwdriver and pliers) were used was also randomised across participants within the experimental trials. Performance measures and subjective assessments were taken at intervals over the trial, at the start (0) and then at 30, 60, 90 and 120min. These were always measured in the same sequence, with the subjective assessments measured prior to the performance measurements to prevent any possible interference. Participants had adequate rest after each 30-min work period while these measurements were recorded, and so it was decided that no further rest periods were required. They were told that they could ask for further rest periods if required, but none did so during the trials. Fig. 5
                            shows a timeline for the measurements of the different performance measures and subjective assessments during each experimental trial.

Since the glove re-designs focused on glove thickness the performance measures of interest were dexterity, tactility and hand strength capability, particularly handgrip, pinch grip and forearm torque. Therefore, the dependent variables measured in the present study were time to complete the pegboard test, number of errors, handgrip strength, pinch strength, forearm torque strength and sensitivity of touch. These measures cover the most important aspects of hand performance/capability required for working with hand tools in assembly tasks. Other performance measures such as muscle activity and wrist posture were not included because only slight effects of cotton gloves on these performance measures had been found in the previous two studies conducted by the authors (Dianat et al., 2010, 2012a). In addition to the performance measures, subjective assessments (rating of ease of manipulation and hand and finger discomfort rating) were recorded during the trials.

The pegboard test, used to measure hand dexterity, is designed to measure gross movements of the hands, fingers and arms as well as finger dexterity, and therefore integrates the speed and precision necessary for assembly tasks (Pennathur et al., 2003; Berger et al., 2009). In this test, the participants were instructed to pick up 30 pegs, one at a time from a pegboard, with their non-dominant hand, pass them to their dominant hand, turn them over and place them in another pegboard. They were asked to complete this task as quickly as possible and the time taken to complete the task was recorded by the experimenter using a digital stopwatch. Number of errors, which was also considered as a measure of dexterity, was defined as the number of objects during each 30-min work period which fell from the hand (i.e. screws, components, wires or hand tools) while performing the simulated assembly task (Dianat et al., 2010).

Handgrip strength, lateral pinch strength and forearm torque strength were three different maximal isometric strength measurements taken during the experiment. The strength measurements followed standard procedures described in the literature. The participants were asked to exert their maximal voluntary strength with their right (dominant) hand and to hold that force for 3s. Two repetitions of each strength measurement were recorded each time with a 2-min rest break between successive measurements, and the average value of the two trials was used for analysis. The two measurements were considered valid if they were within 10% of each other; otherwise the measurement was repeated (Caldwell et al., 1974; Imrhan and Loo, 1989). Handgrip strength was measured using a hand dynamometer (MKIIIa, made by the Medical Physics Department, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, UK) with a grip span of 5cm. This hand dynamometer is based on a bridge of strain gauges and has been used in a number of research studies (Peebles and Norris, 2003; Hillman et al., 2005; Dianat et al., 2012a). Handgrip strength was measured in a sitting posture, with the upper arm next to the trunk, the elbow flexed at approximately 90° and the wrist in a neutral position (Mathiowetz et al., 1985). The lateral pinch strength was measured with a pinch gauge (B&L Engineering, Tustin, CA, USA; range=0–27kg). Pinch strength measurements were carried out in a sitting position, with the participant's shoulder flexed forward by about 30°, the upper arm close to the trunk but slightly abducted and the elbow flexed at about 90°, and the wrist in the neutral position (Imrhan and Loo, 1989). A torque-measuring device (including a torque meter, a T-shaped handle and an AFG 500N Mecmesin Advanced Force Gauge) was used for measurement of the forearm torque strength (Dianat et al., 2010, 2012a). The T-shaped handle made an angle of 70° with its shaft to allow a neutral wrist position during the strength measurements. The torque meter was attached to an AFG 500N Mecmesin Advanced Force Gauge (Mecmesin, Slinfold, West Sussex, UK) for recording the torque strength data. Then, the T-shaped handle was attached to the torque meter shaft (mounted on a steel bar), so that the whole apparatus was vertically adjustable to provide the desired height for each participant. Forearm torque strength (in a clockwise direction) was measured in a standing position with the upper arm parallel to the torso, forearm horizontal and elbow flexed at 90° (Caldwell et al., 1974; Mital and Kumar 1998).

Tactile sensitivity was measured by the monofilament test, which has been reported to have good reliability and validity (Jerosch-Herald, 2005). A Semmes–Weinstein monofilament test set (Smith and Nephew Rolyan, Menomane Falls, WI, USA) consisting of 20 nylon testing filaments, all with the same calibrated length of 38mm but of varying diameters, was used. All measurements (which followed the recommended protocol given by Bell-Krotoski, 1990) were conducted by the same investigator in a quiet room. The participants were asked to turn their head away during the measurements so that they could not see their hand. The participants were instructed to say “touch”, when they recognized that they were being touched by a filament. Each filament, in turn, was applied vertically (very slowly) over the selected hand area and slowly moved down until the filament was bent. The filament was maintained in place bowed over for 1.5s and then slowly removed over 1.5s. The filaments were presented in both ascending and descending orders of diameter so that the participants could not anticipate the order of presentation. Thus, the touch sensitivity threshold was defined by the smallest filament that could be sensed by the participant.

To investigate the discomfort in different areas of the hand and fingers in more detail a hand map was used, together with a scale of 0–5 (where 0=No discomfort, 1=Very low discomfort, 2=Low discomfort, 3=Moderate discomfort, 4=High discomfort and 5=Extreme discomfort) to measure the severity of the discomfort. The participants were asked to indicate the area of any discomfort that they experienced on the hand map and to rate its severity using the discomfort scale. The responses were then explored in more detail by classifying them into the various areas of the hand and fingers (as defined in the Appendix). In addition, a 5-point scale was used for rating ease of manipulation (where 1=very easy, 2=Easy, 3=Neutral, 4=Difficult and 5=Very difficult). The participants were asked to rate their subjective responses on the scales at the start of each trial and thereafter immediately after finishing each 30-min work period during the trial.

Participants recruited for the experiment were 12 male students from the University of Nottingham, aged between 24 and 34 years (mean age=30.5 years, SD=3.2). All participants were right-handed and healthy, with no history of upper limb injury, and none had been professionally involved in working with hand tools (in particular with pliers or screwdrivers). They each signed a consent form before the start of the trials with the option to withdraw at any stage of the study. All participants were paid £8 per hour for their participation. The study was approved by the local ethical review committee at the University of Nottingham.

Statistical analysis of the data was performed with SPSS software version 14.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA), including summarising descriptive data and mixed model ANOVA for evaluation of the main effects of hand condition and time and of their interaction on the dependent variables. In the mixed model ANOVA, the parameters were estimated using the Restricted Maximal Likelihood (REML) Method and the Covariance structure within time and hand condition groups was selected as Compound Symmetry based on Akaike Information Criteria (AIC). Bonferroni post hoc tests on adjusted means were used to explore the main effects and interactions. The discomfort ratings were analysed using the non-parametric Friedman test. P-values<0.05 were considered statistically significant for all analyses.

