

Although rail signal box levers and frames all work on the same basic principles, there are a large number of different frame and lever designs. This has come about due to them being often designed and built local to the area where they were installed, many over 100 years ago. The levers are used within the mechanical form of signalling which was developed during the 19th century to control the movement of trains. Although dated, lever frame signalling is likely to be with us for a good while longer yet. Mechanical signal boxes (e.g. Fig. 2
                        ) have their connection to external devices – such as signals and points – by wire and channel rodding attached to the levers within a metal frame. There are many variants of frame and lever types, along with different release types (triggers and stirrups). The connectivity between lever and the object to be moved gives some clue as to the differences in lever pull weights.

For signals, the standard design is a wire connection from the tail end of the lever through a system of pulleys and detectors to a counter balanced weight fitted to the bottom of the signal post (Fig. 3
                        a). Signal operation through the wire pull has inbuilt slack and elasticity in order to facilitate temperature changes. This therefore allows the signaller to ‘take up’ the slack in the first part of the lever pull and so giving the opportunity to use the momentum and their body weight to move the object.

For points the design and operation are connected up through a solid rodding system (Fig. 3b). Point operation is through connectivity of solid rodding bars (to maintain gauge allowance for point ends) and so there is no ‘slack’ in the system when pulling the lever. This means that the full weight is experienced by the signaller from the start and throughout the entire pull.

Whilst the weight to be pulled (and pushed) is the major factor examined in this study there are other potential hazards in the operation of the levers. Being a mechanical system the connections are prone to sudden failure, often unexpected despite inspection routines, and which could result in acute injury. Also, the long runs of the rods or chains through varying terrain means that they are prone to blockage through bank slides and the operator would have no way of knowing this until trying to take up the weight.

The industry assessment of operability of levers with respect to their manageability is currently by reference to the length of the connection, with no consideration given to weight of pull. This does not appear to follow recognised health and safety thinking and guidelines and regulations (such as those for manual handling), but the lever systems have been around since long before current guidance was developed. The rail industry does work to a number of Railway Group (mandatory) Standards, and Network Rail itself has standards and guidance which may go beyond the legal requirements. Relevant guidance states that: “The maximum recommended distance at which signals can be mechanically operated is 1000 yards which minimises the effects of temperature change on wire routes”, and elsewhere that “wire operation of mechanical signals should be limited to 1000 m”. Thus there is some discrepancy in the various documents which make it difficult to determine which distance is most appropriate to use as a reference. Originally signal boxes tended to be close to points in an attempt to lighten the weight of the pull, but this is not always achieved. Current codes of practice state that “200 yards satisfy the Health and Safety Executive” and “manually worked points should not exceed 320 m rodding run from lever to furthest point end”. The requirements are in the company's own code of practice, to which signalling engineers generally work, but may be challenging and restrictive to achieve from an engineering point of view.

The question that arises is; what is a safe lever weight or effort that an operator can exert given the nature of the task? There is literature on lever pulling but not for full length levers; Page et al. (1990) and Attebrant et al. (1997) examined loads working with hand levers. The former was at railway point switches, but due to the much smaller size of levers this US work concentrated upon hand forces not on whole body movement, and there are no lever frames nor other levers in close proximity to inhibit access; their measured actions also start with the lever parallel to the ground with a lifting movement from a static position and no connectivity through wires or rodding. In a more general description, Kroemer et al. (2001) suggest that large levers used occasionally should have an operational force requirement of less than 190 N. They also find that improved pulling force is achieved with one foot off the ground. Resnick and Chaffin (1995) found peak push forces of 500 N for men and 200 N for woman in pushing of carts of between 45 and 450 kg, and found consistent results for static compression forces at L5/S1 above the NIOSH action limit of 3400 N with stronger participants and loads of above 225 kg.

Nothing more specific was found in the literature and so the general ergonomics guidance on pulling/pushing was examined. Much of the manual handling literature is concerned with lifting and related manual handling tasks. The maximum pulling and pushing forces of the hand during standing work have long been studied, for example by Rohmert (1966) and Rohmert and Jenik (1971) (both quoted in Kroemer and Grandjean, 2000). Pulling forces are greatest in the vertical plane and lowest in the horizontal plane. Pulling and pushing forces are of the same magnitude whether the arms are held out sideways or forwards (in the sagittal plane). Maximum pulling force depends on height and distance of the pulled element, and body weight and posture are of critical importance especially the stance for pulling (Ayoub and McDaniel, 1974). The same authors generate design guidelines around limits on pull height and distance – a maximum pulling force for men of between 40 lb and 150 lb, and for women of between 50 lb and 90 lb, depending on height and distance. They also find that improved pulling force is achieved with one foot off the ground.

Review papers covering a wide range of contributions to do with pull/push forces include Gallagher and Heberger (2012) and Hoozemans et al. (1998), but these do not cover material to do with pulling or pushing large levers These papers identify risk factors of weight, distance, foot stance, one-handed or two-handed operation, force at the hand, symmetry of pull/push and static or dynamic force application, illumination and temperature, all relevant to an extent to our lever work. They do say that the risks from pulling are harder to predict than those from pushing, interesting given our greater concern with pulling (see below). The amount of force a user can exert on a control depends on posture, position, and the length of time the force is applied. ‘Jerk’ forces used to loosen tight controls may be two or three times larger than the corresponding maximum steady forces; forces which must be applied over a long period should, it has been suggested, not exceed 15% of the corresponding maximum force over 5 s, although some continuous application may last for much longer without rest (Galer, 1989).

In a variety of other studies risk factors have been identified – none for full length levers and mostly for cart or other moveable object pulling/pushing or else from biomechanical modelling work (for example Boyer et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2012; Seo et al., 2010). The restricted space found in some signal boxes is likely to have some effects – for instance Lee (2007) showed that restricting their space in front of the task reduced pushing strength by about 25%.

Cart pushing and pulling is perhaps one of the tasks closest to lever operation in terms of the techniques used. Lee et al. (1991) showed that pulling forces (98, 196 and 294 N) resulted in the greatest loading, with findings depending on body weight, and that a pulling height of 1520 cm was better for force application than 660 or 1090 cm. In other work, peak pushing forces of 200 N for women and 500 N for men were reached when pushing carts of between 45 kg and 450 kg with consistent compression forces about 3400 N for the strongest participants at weights of over 225 kg.

The government guidelines and regulations of a number of countries were reviewed (eg the Health and Safety Executive in the UK, the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (in the USA) and the Work Safe Commission in Australia. A range of limits and guidelines are available, according to the task and other work factors, for instance in the UK the guideline for starting or stopping a load is 20 kg for men and 15 kg for women (Health and Safety Executive, 2004, clause 23). However, there are considerable differences between lever pulling and the lifting and lowering tasks on which guidelines appear to be based and which are used as examples in the documentation. Furthermore, the manual handling literature is mainly concerned with maximum voluntary weights and forces, and the regulations and guidelines generally are relevant to the lifting of free weights. With levers, the operator is pulling or pushing something which is supported by a superstructure and is only free to move in a single plane and in a fixed arc of motion. Finally, the types of additional risk factors concerned with the load – eg being bulky or unwieldy, difficult to grasp, not stable or rigid (HSE, 2004, clauses 131–144) – do not really apply to levers.

Therefore it was considered that any acceptable weight limits for lever pushing and pulling are likely to be different to the existing manual handling guidelines, and are likely to be higher, requiring original work to understand where to place guidance limits for a pragmatic management programme.

Looking beyond the weight of a load, the content of the literature that was certainly relevant to our levers study and to a subsequent management plan, was identification of risk factors such as space to move, the quality of the work environment, presence of any obstructions, sudden changes in weight (due to friction, snagging or jamming in the case of levers, or just overcoming inertia at the start of a pull), and stability and slipperiness of footing.

During a two year period more than 160 signal boxes were visited by members of the Network Rail Ergonomics Team for assessment of manual handling risks working with levers. This took place in two phases. First a small in-depth sample was taken where all the levers in each box studied were assessed. Then a much larger pre-screened sample was visited where only levers previously identified as a problem by local staff were assessed. Postures and pulling strategies adopted were noted and the weight for moving the lever(s) measured directly. Other measures taken in many boxes were of risk factors such as lever dimensions, relevant box dimensions (including that of the space in front of the set of levers or lever frame within which the signaller can stand to pull), distance of the pull (ie to the signal or points), and signaller body size and height.

The key risk factor for the task, and the priority for investigation, was the weight to be moved by pulling and pushing the lever via sometimes very long systems of wires, rods and channels. Thus a robust, repeatable, portable method was needed to measure these weights in the field. Weight rather than force was selected for measurement because this is the term used within the railway industry – culturally the lever pulls are discussed in terms of their weight – which allowed a clearer understanding of the issues by the signallers and their managers, and by company engineers subsequently. Field study was needed at this time rather than a laboratory study or a computer simulation because the conditions at each box – length of rods or links, condition of the running channels, type of linkages, maintenance history, etc. – would effect the weight to be moved in every case. We also needed to record the postures and pulling strategies adopted in real practice.

As a first pilot exercise a crude prototype measuring device was applied to the levers. This was a strain gauge attached via a looped strap to a data recorder capable of recording weights up to 100 kg through a metal ring. Each lever movement had weight recorded at three locations through its path: at the start of the pull, during the middle of the pull, and just prior to completion of the pull. The three point measurement gave insight into the variations the signaller was dealing with during the lever operation – the taking up of slack, the quality of the channels and any changes in direction of the connections.

There were a number of limitations to the measurement of weight/force carried out in these early stages of the study with the crude device. The method was only able to give discrete point reading of weight rather than dynamically throughout the range of movement. The device itself changed the way in which the signaller pulled the lever, not a problem if the weights were likely to be consistent but in our case the multiple links between lever and moved object meant that the pulling action and effective weight would differ each time (overcoming inertia and taking up any slack, which varied). Also it soon became clear that a capability to measure weights of over 100 kg was required. Nonetheless the early recordings provided an excellent first indication of lever weights, and therefore of the potential for risk of poor performance in lever operation and especially of harm to the signaller. It helped to justify the extension of the study to many boxes using design and development of a more sophisticated measurement device.

The new measurement device was developed with the aim of assessing a much greater range of weights of the lever pull/push while allowing the signaller to operate the lever as close to normally as possible and not intruding on the signaller's work. The device also had to be flexible enough to fit the large variety of lever handle shapes and sizes, be portable to take to a large number of boxes across the whole country, and be robust. The new instrument consists of a sleeve device with a strain gauge inside which fits over the range of lever handles, attached to a copy handle which lies in the same plane a few centimetres away; this allows the copy handle which is pulled/pushed to be of normal lever diameter and by displacing it somewhat two people could pull the handle if the risk was thought to be a large one (Figs. 4 and 5
                        
                        ). Weight is measured through a shear strain measurement device placed at the bottom of the handle (use of shear force means that turning moments do not have to be considered so that it does not matter where the copy handle is grasped). A tiltmeter is also incorporated so that measured weights can be calibrated against the angle of the lever and so video stills of the posture at any point in the pull/push can be matched to the weight measured. The data acquisition software loaded onto an attached laptop computer captured all the various measures on a time base.

The procedure in each box visited was as follows. The test equipment was set up, comprising the artificial lever handle with the strain gauge inside it, the data logger attached by wire to the lever to collect the data, and a laptop computer connected to the logger to download and view the data. The signallers were then asked to pull the lever and return (push) it three times, using the attached lever as the handle. The measuring device recorded the weight moved (in kilograms) via the handle throughout the entire pull and push back. Three repeated measures were taken to allow the signaller to adjust to pulling the lever, since the “extra” handle was slightly further forward than the normal lever, and because of the natural variation in weight on each pull and push due to changes in the pulley or rodding systems and any slack or lack of which builds up.

As outlined above, the measurement programme has taken place in two phases, each with a specific purpose. The first phase was an in-depth collection of data at a small number of signal boxes. The purpose of this phase was to establish the nature of the problem and collect a wide range of data to help develop criterion levels and to establish a basis for a first assessment and management programme. The boxes that were selected were those where there had been previous reports of lever pulling problems or because other ergonomics audit work was to be carried out there. The total number of boxes in this sample was six.

In each box, on arrival at site the ergonomics team observed the signaller operating the levers and asked the signaller and manager a series of questions about the levers, their maintenance, difficulties and so on. Direct measurements were taken of clearance between the levers and between the levers and a front wall, and any box aspects that may hinder the signaller in pulling the levers – floor type, footboards, frame type, etc. – were noted. Drawings were made of the levers and the links to the points/signals, the distances from levers to operated object noted, and photographs and videos (of lever operation) taken. Signallers were asked for their subjective impression of lever weights and movement difficulty, rating each lever which was to be measured subsequently as “light”, “medium” or “heavy”. Details of the signallers' posture(s) and strategy when pulling the lever (see later), as well as personal details such as age, weight and sex, were taken. Then the direct measurement of weights took place, as described above.

All data were collected on one standard form. Table 1
                         provides a summary of the information collected for two example levers/boxes.

Once it had been established from the first set of measurements that a potential problem existed for the company the measurement programme was extended across the Network Rail system of mechanical signal boxes in the most efficient manner possible. This meant implementing a stage of pre-screening and prior risk assessment. Managers were contacted and asked to identify the degree of difficulty that their staff were experiencing with the different levers in their box(es) and then to inform the Ergonomics Team of any which were reported as being especially heavy or especially difficult to operate. The process of pre-screening allowed concentration of resources on the most critical cases, rather than establishing the full range of weights across all levers in all boxes. Any estimates of the mean and standard deviation of lever pull and push weights for the large sample therefore would be meaningless due to the initially skewed sample, but this was not the main priority in a practical exercise aimed at achieving a feasible risk assessment programme.

The data collection procedure for the large pre-screened sample was simpler than for the in-depth sample. The ergonomist(s) visiting the box confirmed with the relevant manager and signallers which were the levers reported as “heavy” and they were asked to explain why this was. Then the relevant signaller or signallers were asked to operate the relevant levers for the ergonomist to examine the posture adopted and the pulling strategy used. Then the weight of the pre-identified lever(s) was measured. Subsequently the ergonomists would discuss with the relevant staff the risk posed by the lever or levers and ways in which this risk might be mitigated in advance of the system being redesigned or replaced; the topics covered were the pulling strategy used, potential risk factors (such as slippery or raised floors, restricted movement space), precautions to be taken and the value of a full maintenance programme.

Levers in over 160 additional boxes have been assessed in this main programme.

Data on lost time accidents due to lever operation were obtained from the company's safety management system and from human resources sickness records. These sources were analysed to highlight injuries and sickness which could reasonably be interpreted as related to the operation of mechanical lever frames.

Following the initial site visits and data collection, typical postures and weights moved were modelled in the biomechanical human modelling tool JACK. The main focus of the modelling was to establish the possible changes in type and level of potential injury risk with different weights of lever pull and for different operating strategies and postures. We recognise that it would be very difficult to model in detail all the postures and pulling strategies used in practice, for instance where these involved one foot being in the air for a while, and also any sudden changes in the pulling motion during the range of motion which may increase risk though jerk forces; therefore we treated all modelling work and analyses with caution.

Video recordings of the pulling strategies and postures (see below) at a variety of boxes were used to build signaller lever pulling models representing a range of postures (see Fig. 6
                        ). The first phase analysis was carried out for the swing method of lever pulling. Using this method, the signaller uses (usually) two hands to pull the lever forward, starting with arms bent and the body close in to the lever. During the motion, the feet remain stationary and act as a pivot. As the end of the arc is reached, the arms straighten and the back remains straight. For phase 1 of the modelling the signaller was modelled as a 50th%ile male – 175.49 cm tall, weighing 77.69 kg – shown in Fig. 7
                         at nine stages throughout the duration of the lever pull. Weights of 50, 80, 100, 185 kg were modelled to represent three different possible alert and action levels as regards a risk management programme and the maximum weight found in field measurement (180 kg) was modelled in addition. Subsequently, for phase 2, 5th, 50th and 95th percentile populations (male and female) were modelled in a variety of postures although only for the stages of the pull and push where peak compression forces were expected, with lever weights of 50, 80 and 100 kg (i.e. not including 180 kg as this had already been shown clearly to be beyond any acceptable limit).

