

This study observed that restriction of hip mobility due to tight pants may lead to a compensatory response of increased lumbar motion in manual handling tasks as well as reduced lower trunk muscle activation levels (ES). Such alterations in hip and spinal movements are a possible contributing factor to increasing stress on lumbar structures and could be a potential cause of low-back discomfort.

The findings of this study may provide an applicable guide for recommendations on work clothing fit in specific types of MMH activities among younger workers in industrial companies. For small to medium size companies (e.g., 10–100 workers) that may not provide workers with uniforms, companies should provide information on the potential for low-back discomfort associated with wearing tight pants and recommend fit or comfortable personal protective work clothing be worn during MMH tasks.

Regarding limitations of the present study, we did not examine LRoM, trunk muscle activity and back discomfort in more complex physical tasks, such as asymmetrical lifting. This type of lifting is common in industrial settings and reduces the generalizability of our findings. Second, we only investigated the effect of tight pants on young adult performance of MMH tasks. There is a need to look at the influence of restrictive garments on LRoM and pain experiences in other working age groups, such as the elderly. Third, this study recruited only normal BMI participants. Therefore, the findings of this study cannot be extrapolated to overweight or obese persons. Fourth, although the RA and ES muscles act as prime movers during trunk bending tasks, other anterolateral abdominal and low back muscles across the waist, including the internal oblique, transversus abdominis (muscular brace), quadratus lumborum and lumbar multifidus muscles, are important to stabilization of the lumbar spine during bending and lifting tasks (Bergmark, 1989; Panjabi, 1992). Further study should measure the activity levels of these muscles during task performance with tight pants. Fifth, we did not measure compressive load at the lumbar spine for tight and fit pants in the various MMH tasks. A link between the findings of this study and LBP may be limited due to the analysis approach. Future study should use biomechanical methods, such as a motion tracking system and 3DSSPP to estimate compressive loads and shear forces at the lumbar spine for this purpose. Finally, this study did not measure HRoM during task performance and only measured subjective low back discomfort rather than “low back pain”. Therefore, advance testing in these aspects should be considered in future study.

The authors have no personal or financial conflicts of interest associated with this work.

