

The study followed a completely within-subjects design with all participants being exposed to all combinations of garment fit and leisure or work task type. The procedure for the experiment involved randomly assigning a participant to one of two groups, including those wearing tight pants first, followed by fit pants, and those wearing fit pants first followed by tight pants. Subsequent to donning a pair of pants, the participant's hip range of motion was assessed in a supine posture position on a standard medical examination table. Directly following, participants began performing the test trials in the various tasks. The order of task presentation was randomized within-subject (i.e., participants served as a blocking factor). As previously mentioned, each task was repeated three times by each participant with a single trial lasting approximately 5 s (for reaching, lifting or squatting). Once a participant completed all trials in the first task, they moved on to the second task type and then the third. After completing each task trial, subjects were asked to stand in an erect posture and rate their low-back discomfort. After having completed all nine test trials, participants were permitted a 10 min rest period while wearing a pair of fit shorts. At the close of the rest, they donned the alternate type of pants and began the work task trials. At the completion of the second batch of test trials, participants were debriefed and dismissed from the experiment. The entire experiment procedure took about 2 h per participant.

Trunk muscle activity was recorded using surface electromyography (EMG), specifically a BIOPAC MP 36 system (Goleta, California, USA). Lumbar movement was recorded with a digital video camera. The lumbar range of motion was analyzed using video frame extraction software, a computer drawing application, and graphical measurement package. Low-back discomfort was captured using a unidimensional subjective rating scale. Responses were determined by measuring the distance along the scale between the level of discomfort rated by participants and a scale anchor (Areeudomwong et al., 2012; Callaghan et al., 2010).

Regarding the EMG measurement, standard 4 mm Ag/AgCl electrodes were used for capturing muscle activity levels at the right Rectus abdominis (RA) and Erector spinae (ES) muscles. Normally, trunk muscles generate active force equally among both sides when performing symmetrical tasks. We measured the right side muscle EMG levels based on other previous studies that also chose to observe the right side of trunk muscles (Bressel et al., 2009; Cholewicki et al., 2009; Olson, 2010). The skin of a participant was properly cleaned and prepared for electrode placement to reduce external noise in the signal. Electrode pairs were placed at skin locations over the belly of each muscle, as described in other research (Imai et al., 2010; Danneels et al., 2001). For the RA muscle, active electrodes were placed on the anterior abdomen at the level of the umbilical and medial to sagittal plane. A ground was placed over the anterior portion of the iliac crest on the same side as the muscle being measured. Regarding the ES, active electrodes were placed on the low back at the level of L1 and medially to the lumbar spine. A ground electrode was placed over the posterior portion of the iliac crest.

For both muscles, EMG signals were recorded at 1024 Hz. A pre-amplifier was used to achieve signal amplitudes in the expected range for EMG (up to −5 to 5 mV, depending on the signal frequency). The signals were post-processed using low-and high-pass band filters and a 50 Hz notch filter (for electrical system interference (in Thailand)). The root mean square of the EMG response for each test trial was calculated for 50 ms time windows in the signal in order to reduce spurious variation in the responses. The maximum RMS value for the EMG for each muscle in each trial was then amplitude normalized to the maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) for the same muscle captured in advance of the test trials. To generate MVICs for the right RA muscle, participants laid in a supine position with both legs straight and strapped to a standard medical table with a belt. Participants performed a resisted sit-up with maximal manual isometric resistance applied in a symmetrical manner through the shoulders of the participant by an experimenter, who stood at the head end of the medical table (O'Sullivan et al., 2006a). To generate MVICs for the right ES muscle, participants laid on the medical table in a prone position with the upper edge of the iliac crests aligned with the edges of the table. The lower body was flexed to the table by three straps at the pelvis, knees and ankles. With arms across the chest, participants were asked to isometrically maintain the upper body in a horizontal position. Symmetrical manual resistance was applied to the scapular region by an experimenter, who stood at the head of the participant (O'Sullivan et al., 2006a). There were three MVIC trials of 5 s each, with a 3-minute rest period between trials in order to avoid the cumulative effect of muscle fatigue (McLean et al., 2003).

The normalized response EMG was expressed as a percentage of MVIC. The average of the three normalized EMG observations for each pant type × task type condition was subsequently determined for each participant for statistical analysis purposes.

Regarding the lumbar range of motion measurement, reflective markers were placed at vertebral joints along the spine T10, L2, L4 and S2. These joint locations have been previously observed to determine lumbar spine angle (O'Sullivan et al., 2006b). Videos of all test trials were recorded with a digital video camera with a frame rate of 30 Hz. All video files were imported into the VirtualDub video processing software (version 1.9.11 by Avery Lee, GNU General Public License) and individual frames were exported as image files. Image files were subsequently inspected using the software for identification of the most extreme posture position for a specific task (i.e., a single frame for each test trial was used for analysis purposes). One researcher inspected all image files and the video frames used for analysis were selected based on when a participant achieved maximal trunk bending during each task. The spinal angle for a selected video frame was measured using the ImageJ analysis software version 1.46 (National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), USA). A line segment was constructed overlaying the marker images at T10 and L2 and another segment was constructed passing over the marker images for L4 and S2. The two line segments were extended to a point of intersection occurring approximately over the L3 joint. The angle between the two segments was automatically computed by the software (see Fig. 4
                           ). Related to this, all participants were measured lumbar motion during task performance occurring in the sagittal plane, perpendicular to the line of view of the video camera.

For data analysis purposes, the LRoM was normalized based on the hip RoM (HRoM) collected at the outset of each block of test trials for each participant. Related to this, we observed significant restriction of the tight pants on participant HRoM. These values were used as denominators in normalizing the various LROM responses.

After each trial, participants rated their low-back discomfort using a 100 mm visual analog scale with anchors including “none” to “intolerable” (Areeudomwong et al., 2012; Callaghan et al., 2010). Discomfort ratings were specifically focused on the low-back. The participants used pen and paper to complete ratings by marking locations along the scale that best represented their feeling of discomfort after a trial. An analyst used a metric ruler to measure the distance from the “none” anchor to the location of a marking and data was manually entered into a computer for analysis purposes.

We expected that tight pants, typical of the style currently worn by Thai adolescents, would decrease hip mobility (flexion and extension) when compared to fit pants. Related to this, tight pants were hypothesized to increase LRoM as a result of the restricted hip motion (Hypothesis (H)1). It is important to note that the lumbar LRoM was not expected to decrease as a result of tight pants, as the waist line of test garments fell below the L5/S1 joint for all male and female participants. Related to this, trunk muscle activation levels (for the RA and ES) were also expected to decrease with hip restriction caused by wearing tight pants (H2). The feeling of low-back discomfort, as measured with the VAS, was expected to increase as a result of tight pant use (H3). Beyond this, the task types were expected to differ in normalized LRoM, trunk muscle activation levels, as well as perceived discomfort due to whole-body posture variations among the tasks (H4). Specifically, box lifting was expected to the generate greatest RoM, muscle activity and discomfort ratings due to extreme spinal flexion compared to MMH while squatting and extreme forward reaching.

Diagnostics of the normalized LRoM and the VAS ratings revealed the data to be normally distributed and to have equal variances across the types of pants and tasks. However, the trunk muscle activation responses did not have these characteristics. Therefore, logarithmic transformations were applied to EMG data and the transformed muscle activity levels satisfied the normality assumption of the ANOVA. The three-way (participant, pants and task types) ANOVA models with two-way interaction of pant and task types were applied to each response measure. The p-value was set at <0.05.

