

Because of the rapid growth of bicycling communities in recent years, bicycles and riding activities have been researched. Previous studies have primarily focused on riding efficiency (Stone and Hull, 1995; De Vey Mestdagh, 1998), handlebar heights (Kolehmainen et al., 1989), and frame size (Richmond, 1994; Kautz and Hull, 1995). In recent years, the focus of bicycle-related research has gradually shifted to seat (or saddle) design (Groenendijk et al., 1992; Bressel et al., 2009). Chen and Yeh (2012) have observed that the subjective discomfort rating for the buttocks area is relatively higher than those for the other parts of the body. Some riders have quit cycling because of unbearable discomfort or harm caused by bicycle seats (Burke, 1994).

The contact between the seat and the buttocks is a critical cause of discomfort and pain. Groenendijk et al. (1992) showed that the pressure distribution on the seat is determined by how the pads support the pelvic bones. Richmond (1994) and Matheny (1995) indicated that handlebars that are set too low can induce compression neuropathy and certain overuse symptoms, as well as irritation of the labia in female cyclists and of the prostate in male cyclists. Nakamura et al. (1995) examined four long-period and long-distance bicycle-commuting Japanese male students and observed that a nodule had developed near each of their coccygeal regions and the shape corresponded to the saddle of the bicycle. Groenendijk et al. (1992) surveyed 900 cyclists, determining that 36% of men and 42% of women complained about their bicycle seat. The men complained of pain at the pelvic bone, an anaesthetized sexual organ, and pain in the perineal region. Four complaints were specific to female cyclists including painful pelvic bones, irritated genitals, burning skin, and a painful coccyx. Groenendijk et al. observed that discomfort for both men and women occurred even during short bicycle trips (3–10 km). Another study examining 453 cyclists showed that the most frequently mentioned complaints were saddle sores (35%), and more women than men experienced discomfort when riding a bicycle or when seated on a saddle (Christiaans and Bremner, 1998).

Previous studies on bicycle seats have primarily focused on analyzing traditional seats that exhibit protruding nodes (De Vey Mestdagh, 1998; Bressel and Larson, 2003; Bressel et al., 2007) or analyzing the seat pressure distribution for various commercial seats (Lowe et al., 2004; Sauer et al., 2007; Potter et al., 2008; Bressel et al., 2009). In summary, the protruding node length (PNL) is a crucial difference among various bicycle seats.

Differences in the PNL may influence a rider's comfort when cycling. Traditional seats with a long protruding node provide riding stability (Bressel et al., 2009). However, they increase the pressure on the perineal and groin regions, causing riders to extend their torsos far backward when cycling. In this case, because the proportion of the torso weight on the seat is increased, the pressure on the ischial tuberosity is also increased (Potter et al., 2008). Although nonprotruding node seats can minimize pressure to the anterior perineum (Lowe et al., 2004), and may be helpful in reducing seat injuries, they may also increase the risk of falling injuries if stability is compromised (Bressel et al., 2009). This may be because it is simple to slip off a seat that lacks a protruding node (Dickson, 1985); however, this is unacceptable by riders (Lowe et al., 2004). Bressel and Larson (2003) also determined that most riders felt that the seat was uncomfortable. Therefore, an appropriate PNL design is critical; however, previous studies on various riding postures and subjective ratings have compared only commercially available bicycle seats (Bressel and Larson, 2003; Bressel et al., 2009; Lowe et al., 2004). In addition to PNL, the design variables for bicycle seats vary substantially and have not been thoroughly researched in previous studies, causing the understanding of the effect of PNL on riding posture and subjective ratings to be limited.

In this study, we hypothesized that an optimal PNL may exist for traditional seats; furthermore, seats involving protruding nodes that enable maintaining a proper degree of body stability, reducing discomfort in the perineal region, and guiding the trunk to bend forward during riding, thereby lightening the load on the ischial tuberosity. In the experiment, we collected data regarding the body postures of riders, subjective discomfort ratings, and cycling stability after the participants rode a bicycle for 20 min, using various handle heights and seat PNL combinations to identify the optimal PNL.

