

The study was performed in one of Sweden's largest food processing companies (3000 employees), and the largest in slaughtering and meat cutting, which accounts for 60% of the Swedish meat industry. The company had been one of the few in the Swedish food industry, and to our knowledge the only in meat cutting, that prior to this study had been part of research programmes in order to achieve better working conditions for their employees (Hägg and Vogel, 2003, Hägg et al., 2007).

It had three meat cutting plants that were all included in this study, and each plant was a separate unit within the company. When the study was undertaken, one plant (B) cut beef in one department during the day and night shift. The second plant (B&P) cut both beef and pork in four departments on both day and night shifts. The third plant (P) cut pork in three departments, one of which also worked night shift.

Different aspects of the working environment, such as workplace and production layout, manual lifting, and work pace were observed and noted during the visits at each plant. Discussion and clarification of problems were made with relevant occupational categories on all levels.

A questionnaire was developed, comprising of 7 background, 15 multiple-choice and 3 open questions concerning advantages, shortcomings and any comments (Wikman, 1991). Of the multiple-choice questions, three concerned attitudes to the new organization, four concerned physical and mental work load and the rest compared the old work organization with the new one regarding aspects, such as pauses, work pace, accidents and workplace design. The questions used to assess physical and mental exertion were previously used by Engkvist (Engkvist, 2006, 2010).

All meat cutters (100%) present on the day that the questionnaires were distributed had the opportunity to answer the questionnaire. There was no active drop-out, i.e. all meat cutters present answered the questionnaire. Those sick, on parental leave or on vacation were thereby excluded. The number of respondents from each plant is indicated in Table 1
                           .

Temporary meat cutters from employment agencies at the company had to be excluded due to language problems and organizational difficulties. It was estimated that the total number of temporary workers was approximately 100 persons (24% of all meat cutters at the company), distributed according to the size of the plants.

The plants were visited in December 2008 (B) and June 2009 (B&P and P) respectively, three to six months after implementation. The questionnaires were distributed and collected during a break, provided and paid for by the company. There were opportunities to ask the researchers present for clarification when filling in the questionnaire.

The multiple-choice questions were analysed using descriptive statistics, correlations between possible related answers and statistical tests. The descriptive assessment was performed using MSOffice Excel 2007. The statistical calculations were made using the PASW Statistics 18 (SPSS Statistics 18). Mean values were tested for statistical significance with an independent sample t-test at the 95% significance level. Cross tables were tested for significance with Pearson's square test.

The answers to the open questions were analysed concerning their content and themes were identified. The numbers of similar comments were counted concerning each question and each department or plant. Secondly the answers were added to an aggregated level concerning the whole company.

All nine meat cutters' supervisors were interviewed on their roles as supervisors and the performance of the change process. The interviews were semi-structured and followed the same structure as the meat cutters' questionnaire. Notes were taken and structured in themes. Similarities and differences, pluses and minuses, were identified and categorised.

The company's annual reports for 2007–2011 were examined and company statistics on sick leave and on occupational injuries were compiled for the period 2007–2011.

