

Nearly 12,000 individuals are treated in U.S. emergency departments each year for snow shovelling-related injuries (Watson et al., 2011). The most common anatomical region for shovelling-related injury is the lower-back. Specifically, a retrospective study has shown that lower-back injuries account for 34.3% of all snow shovelling injuries, and in most cases, the injury is due to musculoskeletal overexertion, affecting soft tissues (Watson et al., 2011). Mechanically, this overexertion may be represented as increased joint loading in the lower-back. Therefore, biomechanical design of an ergonomic shovel that can decrease these joint loads may have implications for low-back injury prevention.

Perhaps the most common ergonomic snow shovel that is available for purchase is the bent-shaft shovel, which includes a downward bend in the shovel shaft. Despite the retail of bent-shaft shovels, no scientific evidence exists to support its use in terms of reducing mechanical loading at the lower-back. McGorry et al. (2003) studied bent-shaft shovels from a kinematic perspective, and found that a bent-shaft shovel significantly reduced upper body flexion when compared to the more common straight-shaft shovel. Huang and Paquet (2002) reported similar results. It has been speculated that the decrease in upper body flexion associated with bent-shaft shovel use would also decrease lumbar joint moments (McGorry et al., 2003); however, to the best of our knowledge, no study to date has tested this hypothesis.

Although peak joint moments provide an instantaneous indication of the mechanical loads that occur at a joint, they do not provide cumulative load information. For overuse injuries, such as low-back pain, a measure of cumulative loading such as angular impulse (integral of moments with respect to time) may provide more relevant information (Schipplein et al., 1990; Stefanyshyn et al., 2006). Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine if a bent-shaft shovel influences angular impulses about the L5/S1 joint during a shovelling task. It was hypothesized that L5/S1 extension angular impulses would be decreased with bent-shaft shovel use compared to a straight-shaft snow shovel.

