

The 16 participants simulated cycling for 20 min for each of 10 test combinations (2 handle types [straight and dropped] × 5 seat PNLs [0, 3, 6, 9, and 12 cm]). This test time was assumed to be sufficient because discomfort increased most rapidly during the first 10 min of cycling (Abayanayaka, 1993). During testing, the participants pedaled the stationary bicycle at a resistance equivalent to a power output of 120 W at a cadence of 60 rpm. At the end of each ride, the subjective discomfort for various body parts and stability rating scores were immediately self-reported by the participants. The participants repeated each experimental combination twice on distinct days; thus, the reliabilities between the trials were analyzed for each dependent variable. The order of implementing the bicycle setup combinations and repetition was random. Consequently, 320 data records were collected in this study. To analyze the motion data, the participant posture was randomly measured thrice within the last cycling minute (i.e., the 19th–20th minute) as the crank arm was pedaled in a forward horizontal position. These three measurements were averaged for use in subsequent analyses.

The participants were required to wear cycling shorts. Prior to the experiment, the participants warmed up for 5 min to acclimate to the cycling tests. Each participant adjusted the seat to the most comfortable height (Potter et al., 2008), and the preset seat height was determined by referring to Nordeen-Snyder (1977), who suggested that the seat height was set to 100% of the rider's trochanteric leg length. The experimenter then established the handle height based on the height of the seat surface (0 and −16 cm). The workload (120-W) was preset using the Cyclotron Bicycle Auto Trainer, and the pedaling cadence (60 rpm) was controlled using a metronome to maintain the target pedaling rate. After the experiment was initiated, a motion analysis system (Qualisys MacReflex, Sweden), positioned approximately 5 m from the participant and perpendicular to the participant's sagittal plane, recorded the 2D marker positions (resolution = 1:30,000 in the camera field of view at 60 Hz) of the reflective markers on the participants; these angles were calculated using image processing software (Qualisys MacReflex, Sweden). A calibration frame (2.5 m × 2.5 m; four calibration points) was used to construct a validated 2D plane by using the motion system, yielding measurement errors within ±0.5°. To prevent the results from being affected by fatigue, the participants underwent a maximum of two tests per day with a minimum of 2-h intervals between each test. To simulate cycling, the participants viewed a screen positioned approximately 5 m in front of them at eye level while cycling and repeated the information on the screen (e.g., as a sentence) to confirm that they received this information. The information was randomly displayed on the screen at a rate of approximately six times per minute.

This study used SPSS 17.0 statistical software for the statistical analyses. The statistical significance level was set at 0.05, and each participant was considered a block. Two-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to determine the effects of the independent variables on the dependent variables (i.e., body posture, subjective discomfort rating, and stability scores), and Duncan's multiple-range test (Duncan's MRT) was conducted for post hoc comparisons. In addition, a Pearson product–moment correlation was used to explore the PNL and subjective discomfort rating values and the test–retest reliabilities.

