

Law enforcement officers have traditionally worn and carried various protective and functional equipment required in the discharge of their duties (Hooper, 1999; Stubbs et al., 2008). For the New Zealand Police, the duty belt and mandated appointments (equipment currently consisting of a duty belt, radio, extendable baton, pepper spray, handcuffs, a personal protection kit and a torch) weigh approximately 3.5 kg (Stab Resistant Body Armour Introduction and Guidelines, 2007). Body armour (e.g. stab resistant body armour, SRBA) is used widely by law enforcement and other agencies internationally. In 2007, SRBA was introduced to all frontline New Zealand Police, purportedly in response to escalating crimes of violence, and to reduce officer fatalities (Stab Resistant Body Armour Introduction and Guidelines, 2007; Wallwork, 2010). While the SRBA (2.7–3.8 kg depending on size) provides protection from stabbing, blunt trauma, and small calibre bullets, it has been suggested that the SRBA and belt unit negatively affect police physical performance (Hooper, 1999; Stubbs et al., 2008).

Although there is a wealth of literature exploring the impact of added load (backpacks) on human performance (Knapik et al., 1996), few studies have been designed to assess the effect of body armour on task elements typically encountered in policing. Most research involves analysis of military based tasks using heavier specialised military body armour, finding that it adversely affects mobility, strength, speed, balance and physiological strain (Dorman and Havenith, 2009; Larsen et al., 2011; Ricciardi et al., 2008). The weight and rigidity of SRBA along the length of the torso may also hinder an individual's ability to move efficiently and correct loss of balance (Hooper, 1999; Stubbs et al., 2008). Anecdotal police reports and officer interviews within New Zealand and the United Kingdom suggest that SRBA and appointments restrict job related mobility during a number of work related tasks. Tasks cited were running, pursuing, rapidly exiting vehicles and scuffling or grappling with an offender. More mundane tasks, such as manoeuvring or lifting their body weight, carrying, climbing over objects, balancing, and changing a car wheel, were also reportedly affected (Bonneau and Brown, 1995; Collingwood et al., 2004; Hooper, 1999; Stubbs et al., 2008; Wallwork, 2010).

The purpose of this study was to explore and provide information on the influence that the wearing of SRBA and mandated appointments has on physiological markers of effort and performance during the completion of simulated mobility tasks. We hypothesised that wearing the SRBA and appointments would negatively impact all mobility tasks and increase the physiological effort of movement. Given that failure to complete critical tasks in police work could have potentially fatal consequences for police officers, their work colleagues, and the public they serve, this research is timely and necessary.

