

Fifty-three male participants were recruited from the New Zealand Southern Region District Police force with assistance from a Southern Region Police physical education officer. The demanding testing required that participants be physically active with no history of cardiovascular disease or neurological deficits, and free of musculoskeletal injury. Participants were asked to abide by test preparation guidelines and keep pre-testing physical activity, sleep patterns and diet consistent between test sessions.

Participants completed a 10–12 min incremental treadmill test to identify their maximal aerobic fitness (VO2max), with oxygen uptake (VO2), respiratory exchange ratio (RER) and heart rate (HR) recorded throughout. The test ended at volitional fatigue, or when all of the following criteria (Howley et al., 1995) were realised: (i) a plateau in VO2 with increases in external work (ΔVO2 <150 ml·min−1 at VO2peak) (ii) RER >1.1, and (iii) HR reaching ± 10 b·min−1 of age-predicted maximum (220-age). Participants' age, height and body mass were recorded. Following the test, participants were fully familiarised with testing procedures and practiced all five mobility tasks (see Section 2.3) three times each while both loaded and unloaded. This familiarisation and practice ensured test consistency and suitable technique were achieved.

Wearing exercise shoes and clothing, participants completed two identical experimental sessions in a randomised and counterbalanced order. One session was conducted carrying added load (loaded, fitted SRBA plus weight representative of a standard police duty belt and appointments, 7.65 kg ± 0.73, mean ± SD), while the other was completed without additional load (unloaded). Sessions were completed under the same conditions within an eighteen day period, with at least four days between sessions. It was not possible for all participants to complete their testing at the same time of day due to availability and shift work schedules.

During each session, participants completed five mobility tasks (initial phase) that were selected based on job task analyses from the literature (Bonneau and Brown, 1995; Hooper, 1999; Stubbs et al., 2008) and a review of the New Zealand Police Physical Competency Test (Handcock and Dempsey, 2011) to represent mobility challenges encountered during police work. Time between the tasks were standardised based on expected exertion (45 s after the lower exertion balance and acceleration tasks and 90 s after the higher exertion chin-ups, grapple and manoeuvrability tasks), but also to adhere to data recording and session time constraints. After the fifth mobility task, participants rested for 5 min (final 3 min seated) and were connected to a metabolic cart (Cosmed, CPET, Rome, Italy). They then completed a 5-min run on a zero grade treadmill at 13 km·h−1 commencing from a running start. While the amount of job related running for police is difficult to quantify, the treadmill run was an attempt to replicate a near maximal running effort that may present a worst-case policing scenario (Bonneau and Brown, 1995; Collingwood et al., 2004; Strating et al., 2010). The 13 km·h−1 treadmill speed was based on the mean running speeds attained during the run section of the New Zealand Police Physical Competency Test (Handcock and Dempsey, 2011). Measures of HR (Polar S-810i, Kempele, Finland), VO2, and RER were recorded and averaged over the final min. A rating of perceived exertion (RPE) score (Borg 6–20) was recorded during the final 20 s of the run. On run completion, participants rested for 1 min before repeating the five mobility tasks with identical rest times (repeat phase). To avoid possible performance bias, participants were blinded to their initial phase results.

The mobility tasks were:
                           
                              (1)
                              a timed balance task, standing on a stabilometer platform with feet shoulder width apart. Initial balance was achieved and as soon as the participant's hands were released from supports the test began. The objective was to keep the platform balanced against lateral excursions (left and right edges out of contact with the ground) for 30 s. Time off-balance was recorded as the total time the platform was in contact with the ground.

an acceleration task to simulate exiting a vehicle. Participants began this task sitting in a floor mounted car seat (Nissan Skyline GTS, seat bottom 30 cm high) with their feet flat on the ground. On “GO” they stood without arm assistance, pivoted 90° to the right and sprinted 2.85 m through a set of opto-reflective timing gates.

as many successive standard chin-ups as possible (underhand grip). Upper body strength or strength endurance has been indicated as an important element in a number of police job task analyses (Bonneau and Brown, 1995; Collingwood et al., 2004; Handcock and Dempsey, 2011).

a grapple task. On “GO”, participants raised a cylindrical ‘grappling bag’ (GBAG; weight 64.5 kg, length 155.25 cm, diameter 37.10 cm) to vertical position. Grasping the middle of the GBAG, they then lifted the GBAG 0.75 m onto a wooden platform (89 × 122 cm) demarcated into two target zones (each 45 × 56.7 cm) separated by a 70 mm high by 65 mm wide strip (Fig. 1
                                 ). The GBAG was then lifted and moved twice over the strip, touching the bag down in each target zone, before being lifted off the platform, tilted down and dragged 4.5 m until the distal end of the bag crossed a line and the timer was stopped.

a manoeuvrability task. Participants started in a push-up position. On “GO”, they dropped their chests to the floor, rolled to their left, pushed hard upwards to perform a clapping push up, dropping back to the floor. They then rolled back to their right before pushing back up to their starting position. Participants then pivoted around their feet, walking their hands around to complete a full anticlockwise circle. Once back at their start position, participants then military crawled forward 3 m using only their elbows (no lower limb assistance permitted) until both elbows entered a marked square. They then stood to press a switch and stop the timer (Fig. 2
                                 ).

Participants' 5-min run HR and VO2 data were normalised as a percentage of values recorded during their maximal treadmill test. Some task results are expressed as percentage difference between the means for clarity. A linear mixed model analysis (SPSS-19.0 Inc. – Windows) was individually conducted on each of the mobility task scores and 5-min run measurements (as dependant variables) with loading and test phase (before or after the 5-min run) as repeated effects (i.e. loading, test phase, loading × test phase) for each task and participants grouped as a random effect. A compound symmetry heterogeneous covariance matrix best suited the data and was thus assumed best for the covariance structure. Estimated marginal means (±SD) and 95% confidence limits were calculated and compared with a Sidak confidence interval adjustment. Residuals were examined for serial correlation, heteroscedasticity and normality, estimated models were deemed satisfactory.

