

The study procedure followed three main stages (Fig. 1
                        ). These stages were common to both the semi-structured interviews and the focus groups.

Following briefing and obtaining study consent from participants, interviewees were asked a set of questions regarding their previous experience with children's safety and warning signs (Stage 1). Questions probed what signs participants were aware of, where they had seen these and their purpose. In addition, interviewees were asked about the specific features of signs and warning which they considered to be important as part of the content and general design of safety signs and warnings. The prime purpose of Stage 1 was to generate information about children's signs without a feeling of being constrained by the guidelines developed earlier, or prompted by current signs shown to them later. Stage 2 involved participants evaluating each of the design guidelines developed by Waterson et al. (2012, Table 1) and discussing the strengths, weaknesses and suggestions for improvements for each guideline. Participants were then shown a set of signs currently in use within the UK. These signs were drawn from examples of rail safety warnings commonly found on trains or at train and underground stations. In addition, participants were also shown examples of the signs which were developed as part of the Waterson et al. (2012) study. The purpose of this phase of the data collection was to use the signs to prompt comments and stimulate discussion by participants. Figs. 2 and 3
                        
                         show examples of the signs which were shown to participants.

Finally, the Stage 3 involved participants evaluating each of the evaluation guidelines developed by Waterson et al. (2012, Table 2) and discussing the strengths, weaknesses and suggestions for improvements for each guideline. In addition, participants were asked about their ideas and suggestions for methods for evaluating warning signs and other visual information for young children.

All of the interviews and focus groups were recorded using a digital recorder and manually transcribed into Microsoft Word documents. The data was then inputted into the NVivo (version 7) qualitative data analysis software package. Template analysis (King, 1998; Crabtree and Miller, 1999) was used to further examine and develop codes using a set of a priori codes based upon the interview and focus group questions and the design and evaluation guidelines. Once the a priori codes had been defined they were subsequently applied to the whole dataset. During the second phase of data analysis the original codes were reanalysed and a number of additional themes and sub-themes emerged from the data. This process followed the guidelines outlined by Miles and Huberman (1994) and aimed to establish consistent coding schemes (Robson, 2002). The codes were developed independently by both authors and then compared and discussed. A final set of codes for the interview and focus groups emerged out of these discussions.

In general, participants showed a good deal of awareness of locations and places where they had encountered warning signs for children. Examples included outdoor centres, swimming pools, traffic signs and labels on products and packaging. Recall of the details of specific signs proved harder however. Some participants were able to describe in detail signs designed to encourage hygiene (e.g., hand washing) and safe behaviour on playgrounds. Participants in the interviews and focus groups often talked about signs in relation to current or past safety campaigns aimed at children. These included campaigns targeted at road safety (e.g., the UK Department of Transport, Think! Campaign and the associated Green Cross Code aimed at 5- to 7-year olds – Department of Transport, 2012; the UK Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents use of the Tufty the squirrel character – RoSPA, 2012; Firth, 1973), as well as campaigns focused on accident in the home and rail travel (e.g., The 1980s ‘Play it Safe’ campaign – Jackson, 1983).

Participants were asked to list what features they deemed to be important on safety signs. The most frequently used words to answer this question were: colour(s) (17), character (9), simple (8), and understand/attention (6). Fig. 4
                         shows a tag cloud of these suggestions.

Some participants emphasised the need for colours to build on the natural associations children have with the circumstances they associate with danger and hazards (e.g., the colour ‘red’ signals ‘danger’), whilst others stressed the need for colours to use a limited set of colours, rather than make signs too ‘busy’. A common observation was the need to be aware of the prevalence of colour blindness and the problems involved in using some colour combinations (e.g., red–green pairings).

The use of characters, cartoons and other pictorial material was mentioned a number of times during the interviews and focus groups. Characters from television and other media (e.g., the action character ‘Ben 10’) alongside the use of images which were perceived to be familiar, engaging or comforting to young children (e.g., teddy bears, hedgehogs) cropped up in discussions. One participant highlighted the value of using symbols used to teach specific groups of children (e.g., hearing impaired children). Fig. 5
                         for example, shows an of the sign language symbols used in the Makaton system (The Makaton Charity, 2012).

The importance of keeping up-to-date with trends and changes was also stressed alongside the importance of using characters and images which were immediately recognisable and identifiable: “there's not a child on the planet that can't spot the M in the McDonalds and the tick [used with the Nike brand], you don't even need the word for Nike because you have the tick” (Focus Group 3 – Parents and Teachers).

A number of participants stressed that young children vary a great deal in their ability to comprehend information (e.g., ability to read simple words) and that designing for the age group 5–11 needs to take these factors into account: “My children are starting to recognise words like cat, dog that kind of word. Some of the kids are very good and they can read simple vocabulary, some of them can't read at all” (Interview – Teacher). One participant (a film producer with experience in making television safety programmes for children) emphasised that younger children respond better to animal characters, as compared to older children who are more likely to identify with characters representing children or adults. The need for simplicity in terms of the pictorial and textual aspects of the signs was stressed a number of times. The need for ‘one glance understanding’ (Interview – Illustrator) and the avoidance of relying solely on words, was emphasised: “I would imagine your first objective would be to avoid words altogether, it may not be possible, it all depends on what you are trying to put over and say. … try to do it pictorially” (Interview – Illustrator). Finally, the importance of designing for children with disabilities, special needs or visual impairment was repeatedly stressed by participants. A significant proportion of the child population is dyslexic or speak English as a second language. These types of considerations underlined the need to avoid language as much as possible when considering the components of visual signs.

In general, there was support for the design guidelines (Table 1), however, a number of participants felt that more details could be included and some modifications were needed. Most participants found Guidelines 1.i (preparation) and 1.ii (design and evaluation) useful, however some felt that these were more applicable to designers and illustrators, as compared to human factor researchers: “It's not particularly unique to testing a sign so it depends who the audience are. As a person that does research work, I would already know that” (Interview – Human Factors Researcher).

In other cases, it was felt that these guidelines had value, but needed to be extended and complemented by an overview of the design lifecycle and an indication of where each guideline applied to stages in the lifecycle: “it would be useful to almost have a flowchart, [in other words] this is how you go about developing [safety signs for children] … it would be helpful if they were put in sequence” (Interview – Human Factors Researcher). It was also pointed out that the design of signs and other visual material for children is often a team effort and that more specific guidance linked to design lifecycles, phases etc., might help to establish continuity between team members over time and handover between different specialists within the team. The general function of the guidelines as a whole was questioned a number of times by participants. One of the central questions was the intended audience of the guidelines and the need to tailor their content to this audience: “Who are the guidelines for? Who are the intended audience? … I'd expand some of those statements to be a little more prescriptive” (Focus Group – Human Factors Researchers).

A similar comment from one of the illustrators was that the need to set the guidelines within a design context where designers often worked under a great deal of time and budgetary pressure. The guidelines needed to be more direct, punchier and tailored to the day-to-day ‘working world’ of the illustrator or designer: “You need to be able to glace at something once and understand [straight away] … you don't stop to read things when you are a designer” (Interview – Illustrator). This comment was reinforced by other groups who had experience in designing safety signs for trains: “you've got to make it so the designer can do their job … It's about getting that process to be concise and quick enough and easy enough …” (Focus Group – HF Experts). One of the interviews with an illustrator revealed that one of the main functions of the guidelines should be to provide support and prompt ideas for the content of the warning sign. The description of the process of illustrating a children's book showed that much of the process the illustrator used was relatively ad-hoc, ill-structured and informal: “I would normally target it with 2 or 3 friends just around the house just very quickly, what's that? Do you like that? I would then go out I would probably find someone who has children from a friend group” (Interview – Illustrator).

Guideline 2.i (types of signs) was viewed as being helpful, but in need of expansion and positioning in a larger context: “Signage should be developed in association with the environment/product/equipment you are developing so that it matches what the gaps are. … If you retro fit a sign … in the wrong place, it's not going to work.” (Interview – HF Expert). An important part of the context of use was the location of the sign and the need for the sign to be within the child's line of sight. Guideline 2.iii (Language) was seen as important, but in need of additional considerations (e.g., variation in reading ability, children with English as a second language). One of the participants mentioned a book which shows examples of signs (Hoban, 1983) which can be read by pre-school children before they have been formally taught to read (i.e., children recognise, rather than read the words – examples include words such as ‘Playground’ and ‘Walk’).

Guidelines 3.iii (number of words) and 3.iv (use of terminology) elicited a number of comments inline with those described in Section 3.1 (e.g., the importance of minimising the number of words, using simple language). One participant commented on the ‘Mind the Gap’ poster (Fig. 2c) in order illustrate the way in which misunderstandings might occur with younger children: “… that doesn't show the gap does it? A small child might just simply think that is someone running to catch the train or dancing” (Interview – Illustrator).

The guideline addressing fonts and lettering, 3.v, received the most criticism from participants. Many pointed out that within the UK children typically learn to read lowercase letters first and then only progress at a later stage to capitals (Department of Education and Skills, 2006). Uppercase may work with signal words such as ‘STOP’ but the use of bold and exclamation marks were preferred for emphasis. When selecting fonts for use on signs it is important to consider the shape of the letters – they should be as similar as possible to those that children learn. A suggestion from one of the teachers and an illustrator was to use the comic sans font as this displays the letters in a form which is easy for children to read and learn. Some participants requested that more information was available on the size of fonts and viewing distances. This information is available for adult's signs (e.g., RSSB, 2003), but equivalent data for children is much harder to find.

Guidelines 4.i (pictograms) and 4.ii (examples) were viewed as important and received support by participants. The question of whether to show examples of good and bad behaviour in the same sign generated some discussion amongst participants. Many felt that showing bad behaviour might encourage children to try out the action in the sign: “Some [children] would think look there's the bad behaviour I hadn't thought about it lets go do that … look what I can do, I can swing off the rails rather than oh look I can sit sensibly on the train” (Interview – Teacher).

Guidelines 4.iii (symbology), 4.iv (characters) and 4.v (colours) received support from participants. Many of the comments reinforced statements made in Section 3.1 above. Some of the characters shown on the signs developed in our earlier work involved the use of monsters and ‘gargoyles’. These were seen to be potentially frightening to very young children and it was recommended that they be replaced with ‘friendly’ characters. Some of the participants recommended that a consistent set of characters were used in signs, these could serve to reinforce the intended message and could be memorised by children (Young and Wogalter, 2001). The positioning of characters within the overall sign was highlighted as important: “We thought very carefully about where the text was going to be and certainly in programmes [TV programmes in the ‘Play it Safe’ campaign] I made later” (Film Producer).

The comments made by participants on the evaluation guidelines (Table 2) were broadly positive. Most of our sample found the information and suggestions for methods and activities to be helpful and capable of providing support for sign evaluation. Most of the comments related to additional activities and considerations which should be taken into account during evaluation. One observation which cropped up a number of times was that evaluation should be seen within a wider context and not simply restricted to warning signs. Participants described the value of evaluating signs as part of larger effort of understanding the impact of larger safety campaigns involving a range of activities and media (e.g., school visits, use of websites, information leaflets). In common with the evaluation of the design guidelines, participants also emphasised the value of positioning the guidelines within a broader design context which corresponded to the stages and activities typically undertaken by designers and illustrators. Examples of what this might look like included current guidelines (e.g., ANSI, 2011; ISO, 2008, 2011) for the design of signs for adults. At the same time, it was acknowledged that the types of evaluation carried out within the guidelines might be difficult with young children (e.g., one-to-one testing of comprehension), but might work with older children (i.e., 8+).

A second set of comments related to the need to underline the importance of the context in which the signs would be positioned, located and used (Guideline 2 – setting). Participants stated that in many instances it was difficult to judge the suitability of a design (e.g., the sliding doors warning signs – Fig. 2a and b) without knowing more about the context. One way of achieving this was to attempt to either simulate the context or carry out evaluation in situ: “Couldn't you try and set up a train or something like that with the doors … you'd invite children in to a mock-up train station with the train” (Focus Group 3 – Parents and Teachers). Acting out the roles either in the classroom or a real situation (e.g., talking the children on a trip to a train station) and possibly asking teachers or parents to dress up and make the activity fun to children was also mentioned: “It might be worth considering someone who is an actor who could may be portray different roles, being a train guard or whatever situation” (Interview – Illustrator). The role of storytelling featured in some participant's comments (Guideline 5 – activities), particularly as a means of establishing some context for the sign: “you would start a conversation about whose ever been on a train, who knows about different trains. Look at these pictures what sort of train is this?” (Focus Group – Parents and Teachers). Additional materials such as videos, photographs, multiple-choice tests were also suggested as ways of complementing role playing and storytelling. The inclusion of rewards and incentives was also thought to be worth considering (e.g., giving out stickers and badges for taking part in role-playing exercises).

A number of additional points were made including the comment that the guidelines assume a relatively passive role for children in the evaluation activities. One participant (a teacher) pointed out that within her school, some of the children had been involved in designing safety posters and that their designs had hung on the walls of the school (e.g., a poster warning children not to run in school corridors). A related comment was that children should be regarded as designers themselves and the activity of designing could be included as part of design and evaluation activities. Many participants commented that many warning signs are not designed with children in mind: “The ones that are in schools are very highly specialised and specific … The ones on trains they're not designed for children,” (Interview – Illustrator). One reason for this was that younger children, particularly those less than 7, are most likely to be accompanied by a parent or guardian when they first encounter a sign. In these contexts it may be that adults and children are likely to interpret the meaning of a sign together: “if you are designing for the children, you are designing for the adult with the child” (Interview – Illustrator). A final set of comments emphasised the need to treat young children with respect and not to patronise them: “I would make sure that you talk to them like a real person, don't talk down to them … ” (Interview – Teacher); “Children are very quick to take offense and children always believe they are older than they are.” (Interview – Illustrator).

